---
title: "Book Review: Peak: Secrets from the New Science of Expertise"
date: 2025-08-25
tags:
  - read_notes
categories:
  - Reading Notes
---
## Book Info

| Field | Info |
| ---- | ---- |
| Name | [Peak: Secrets from the New Science of Expertise](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26312997-peak) |
| Author | [K. Anders Ericsson](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/101817.K_Anders_Ericsson), [Robert Pool](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/195099.Robert_Pool) |
| Genres | Psychology, Self Help |
| Keywords | Deliberate Practice |
## Why read?

Actually, I heard a lot of people recommend this book. Also, I am preparing for my IELTS exam. So I want to find an effective way helps me master English, although now I find there are more dedicated way for IELTS that are better. Overall, I also recommend this book because you will have a chance to know how to master any skills through *deliberate practice*.

## Is it helpful?

You know, the most difficult part in life is always the *practice* (that I mean is to evaluate one method). Because I have not practiced the theories in book in person, I can not say whether it is helpful, but at least the knowledge in this book is helpful.
## Deliberate Practice

If you want to just learn one skill, you solely need to follow some standardized courses. Then you will reach the satisfactory skill level. However, you also will stop onto this level. For making continuous progress, you may need to use the way of *deliberate practice*.

There are some core principles about deliberate practice, these are:
1. Get feedback.
2. Get out of your comfort zone.
3. Focus on it.
4. Also require a lot of time to practice.

*Useless practice* is a sort of way that just depends on repetition, which play a role in a certain period. Just like we are walking in a circle. *Feedback* lets us know the deviation between our current behavior and ideal behavior. *Get out of comfort zone* is the motivation of our progress. *Focus on it* is practice efficiently and sometimes we can achieve breakthrough under the state of total focusing.

## Some takeaways

> 1. Mental Representation: A hallmark of expert performance is the ability to see patterns in a collection of things that would seem random or confusing to people with less well developed mental representations.
> 2. Neuron Adaptability: If you practice something enough, your brain will repurpose neurons to help with the task even if they already have another job to do.
> 3. Researchers who have studied long-distance runners have found that amateurs tend to daydream or think about more pleasant subjects to take their minds off the pain and strain of their running, while elite long-distance runners remain attuned to their bodies so that they can find the optimal pace and make adjustments to maintain the best pace throughout the whole race.
> 4. One of the best ways to create and sustain social motivation is to surround yourself with people who will encourage and support and challenge you in your endeavors.
> 5. There are no big leaps, only developments that look like big leaps to people from the outside because they haven’t seen all of the little steps that comprise them.

## Finally

**Whatever you are doing, focus on it.**