---
title: Focus
feed: show
---
I am thinking one thing recently, that is how to exist about life. “Life is always this hard”. But we choose working hard, spend a large quantity of time finishing homework or do trivias don't need to consider. These are things we really want to do. Everyone wants to do something they want to do. But we have to. We always say that as a general reason.

The problem is really difficult to solve. So it seems to be a kind of exploiting. However, it doesn't make sense. Because it is swap, actually. We work, then we get paid off. Fairly! So why we are trapped in the circle. Work is like eating shit.

**What are we really want?** If you don't want to work, you just want to relax, play or entertain. You can do that. But we probably worry about anyone else evaluate you as a layabout. You konw most of us don't want to work, actually. They want to travel, find new things, get new feelings and so forth. I don't know how to solve the problem in this case.

But if you want to create something you are interested in, want to leave some tracks in the world, find life meaning, I think it is sovlable. **To do what you want to do under the condition making a trade-off in terms of current income, deposit.** Is making money really necessary for you?  Many people advice to save money. It is reasonable. I think what they really want to say is don't waste money, don't spend money for persuing luxury, fanity, don't be cheated. They hope you make your money play a tangible role in your life.

If we still have to work to make money after careful consideration, we need to think out how to refrain it. Or change your work. It seems there is only these two solutions.

So try to see your work as a single thing. You can split it into many smaller things. See them as a series of goals, then try to achieve them. Just focus on how to achieve them, instead of caring coworker's attitude.

I really want to say we need a mainline that is our primary task/interest in life. Otherwise, we are probably going to be a undirectioned, lost person. That hardly makes us feel happy and wonder too many things. Appetence is magnified.

So TRY TO BECOME A DIVE-INTO PERSON! To think carefully and deeply!