---
title: Talk with myself
feed: hide
---

# Talk with myself

Now, it's the fourth day of the holiday combining The Mid-Autumn Festival and National Day. And I haven't yet gone outside, I mean, I haven't gone out for travelling or going home. I am alone, or say, I am trying to be alone, to feel it and enjoy it. Actually now, I am sitting on the stool in a Starbucks and write this note.

Yesterday morning, I read out the book *我们为什么上瘾*, just like going through a flow. I got some stimulies, some markers I have made, some kinds of empathy about addiction. Do I need to make a conclusion, although I was going to do that at the begining, that means pursuing the result, ONLY! Do I enjoy reading it? Not really yes. I don't read it with one mind that means I was thinking other things like speed, arguments and why I haven't yet read out it. Briefly, I am not concentrative. (I am F not T, so I more care the experience rather than the fact.)

## Thought of minimalist

In the morning of today, I spent a short of time to meditate. **Limited resource/Finiteness** came into my mind, and I have been thinking the advantage of it until now. (1) Don't need to make decisions. That saves time. For example, taking dressing, black turtleneck sweater and jeans. Hundreds of them are put in the closset. We want to calm down, to get a peace of mind. (2) Focus on what we want to do. Important + Unurgent. Distraction is annoying. Everyone of us don't like to be distracted. We want to make an end. Multi-tasking is inefficient.