---
title: How to perceive Long Termism?
date: 2023-05-21
categories: 
- Thinking
---

How to perceive Long Termism? / 如何看待长期主义？

1/ What is Long Termism from me?

I have seen the word many times, and people around me often refer to it as well. Now the word is used to describe doing a thing with a long-term plan and the participants aren't hurried to achieve many goals. They do the thing step by step. In other words, they don't eager for quick success and instant benefits. Sometimes this is pretty difficult to forgo to chase short-term benefits or gains. Short-term things are easy to do, such as swiping short videos, but they always make small effect, which is usually ignored or forgot, unless we can connect each one in them. So doing short-term thing is almost up to our current state. When our state changes, the behavior follows it. In addition, the state changes frequently. Thereby we always do normal things that can satisfy our short-term demand, like physiological need and stimulus. That makes us seem primitive, I think. Just because we can't control ourselves. There is no difference with animals(I don't mean discriminating animals).

2/ How to do something in a kind of long termism way?

When I mention long termism, I often transform its meaning to A LONG-TERM PLAN. Beginning from this perspective, a goal will be more marvellous, and becomes a mission.
So try to think about something we really want to do but haven't done yet. Think clearly. If we really plan to do it, we can make plans for how to do it step by step. In that time, to consider results from every stage. If the target is too difficult to finish it, try to split it into a couple of smaller targets that is easy to reach. If a mosquito, or a rabbit, or a big rock is in front of us, don't be irrated, stray, or feel hopeless. Go to think our goal again, look at your position and decide how to walk next. Just like a stone sinks to the bottom of the sea directly.

3/ Long termism, but not perfectism

Be objective and be rational. That means don't go to pursue the perfection. Long termism isn't equal to perfectism. Perfetism is good, but is unsuitable. When everything is prepared, it may be too late. And we often trap into the problem worrying not ready yet unconsciously so that waste too much time. We can take a step forward, if we can't withstand the pressure or the situation, just step back. It is a more effective way to figure out what we really lack.

4/ Cons

Think in long termism is a kind of thinking pattern. If it becomes thinking refection due to using too much, we will be slow. Because many things don't supply sufficient time to permit considering clearly, to measure every step. We need to give the answer rapidly. Actually my real meaning I want to illuminate is clutivating the ability to improvise(I'm the bad example! 😅)